Motivation: Traditional methods in epidemiology are based on the development of cohorts of individ-
uals which are monitored during a certain period of time. The digitalization of stored information in

hospitals now allows for the exploitation of medical data initially gathered for other purposes than epi-
demiology. More specifically, hospitals continuously gather huge amounts of textual data in electronic

health records (EHRs). Storing health data in text format is convenient, but without processing, manual
search and analysis operations on such data become tedious. Automating the extraction of information
from vast amounts of EHRs would provide new data sources for epidemiology and other research
fields. In recent years, different studies reported the use of natural language processing (NLP) tools to
structure the information contained in electronic health records and perform statistical analysis on this

structured information. The main difficulties with the existing approaches is the requirement of syno-
nyms or ontology dictionaries, that are mostly available in English only and do not include local or

custom notations. Therefore, we experimented the creation of a team composed of oncologists as
domain experts and data scientists to develop a custom NLP-based system to process and structure
14,029 textual clinical reports from 2000 to 2017 of patients suffering from breast cancer.
Results: The tool relies on the combination of standard text mining techniques and an advanced
synonym detection method. It allows for a global analysis by retrieval of indicators such as medical
history, tumor characteristics, therapeutic responses, recurrences and prognosis. The versatility of the
method allows to obtain new indicators with ease, thus opening up the path for retrospective studies
with a substantial reduction of the amount of manual work. With no need for biomedical annotators or
pre-defined ontologies, our structuring method reached an extraction accuracy that ranges from 70 to
96.8 % for several concepts of interest, according to a comparison with a manually structured file.
Unlike existing method, the text structuring technique presented in this paper is language agnostic, and
does not require to complete an existing corpus with local or new notations.